# 2024 Linux for Bioinformatics Workshop - Day 01

## View and modify files
On the command line, there is no graphical interface that allows you to view the content of a file.

### Looking through files and variables
You can read files without opening them in an explorer by printing them to the terminal. 

_En ligne de commande, vous pouvez lire des fichiers sans les ouvrir dans un explorateur._

``` bash
# Go to teaching/day01

# Use less
less Ecoli/ref_index/Escher*.fasta

# Use cat

# Use head

# Use tail

# to read the file Ecoli/ref_index/Escher*.fasta

```

* Which kind of information does this fasta file contain? _Quel type d'information ce fichier fasta contient-il ?_
* What are the differences between those command? Use the ```--help``` directive to get further information on the commands. _Quelles sont les différences entre ces commandes ? Utilisez le paramètre directive ```--help``` pour obtenir plus d'informations sur les commandes._
* What is the complete name of the fasta file? Why did we use ```*``` in the commands above? _Quel est le nom complet du fichier fasta ? Pourquoi avons-nous utilisé ```*``` dans les commandes ci-dessus ?_
* How can you quit less? _Comment quitter le programme `less`?_

### Text search
The `grep` command is used to search for specific patterns or text within files. It allows users to specify a search pattern (regular expression) and then scans input files to find lines that match that pattern, subsequently displaying those lines as output. 

_La commande `grep` est utilisée pour chercher des motifs spécifiques ou du texte dans les fichiers. Elle permet aux utilisateurs de spécifier un motif de recherche (regular expression) et analyse ensuite les fichiers d'entrée pour trouver les lignes qui correspondent à ce motif, puis affiche ces lignes en sortie._

Use the `--help` directive to find information on the following tasks.

```bash
# Go to teaching/day01

# Grep each line that contains a >
grep ">" Ecoli/ref_index/Escher*.fasta

# Copy the folder and its content Human from /home

# Grep lines containing the symbol / in Human/ERR9874574_summary.txt

# Grep lines containing the symbol / at the beginning of the line

# Grep lines containing the symbol / at the end of the lines

# Grep every line that does not start with /

```

### Working with gzipped files
File sizes in genomics often reach immense proportions, often spanning gigabytes in size. To mitigate storage demands, these files are commonly compressed, typically using the gzip format. Compressed files, such as those generated in genomic analysis, contain binary data and are typically inaccessible to standard text-based tools. However, you can effectively inspect gzipped files directly from the command line without the need to decompress them., using the following commands

```bash
# Go to teaching/day01

# Execute the following command
zgrep "^@" Ecoli/SRR16212259.fastq.gz | head

# View the tail of the same file

```
* Which information does a `fastq` file contain? What do the `@` represent?
* Describe the output of the command.


### Modify files with Nano
Text files can be edited on the command line, using the text editor Nano. Nano is a command-line text editor that provides a simple interface for users to create, edit, and modify text files directly within a terminal window. It offers basic functionality similar to other text editors, such as opening, saving, searching, and replacing text. Nano does not have a mouse, text only, this means that you have to use the keys to navigate within the file that is currently open.

Before you try out Nano to open a file, make yourself familiar with the necessary shortcuts:
1. Ctrl + G: Access the help menu for Nano.
2. Ctrl + X: Exit Nano (with the option to save changes if any).
3. Ctrl + O: Save the current file.
4. Ctrl + W: Search for a specific string in the text.

```bash
# Navigate to teaching/day01

# Create a new file
touch my_text_file.txt

# Open the text file with Nano
nano my_text_file.txt
```


* Write your name, your favorite color and your favorite animal in the text file. Save and exit Nano. Print the content of the file to the command line.